## 1. Patience and compassion must _always_ be maintained

Imagine you're writing yourself a note. You go to pick up a pencil, but when you do, it slips out of your hand and falls to the ceiling, seemingly against gravity.

"That's weird," you say. "That doesn't usually happen." You calmly walk over to your computer and run a search for "pencil fell to ceiling when i touched it" - no results. So you stare up at it for a while. Then back at the spot where you picked it up. Then at your hand. Finally, you call a friend who brings a ladder. When they see the pencil, they're baffled as well, but dutifully help you retrieve it. You warily proceed to make your note and then put the pencil back down. It doesn't happen again. But you don't quite trust the pencil anymore, so in the back of your mind, you make a note that if it defies gravity again, you'll get a new pencil. Just in case.

Of course, you're reacting to this absurd and seemingly physics-breaking phenomenon in such a way because as a developer, you're _used_ to stuff like this. In the world of code, no one is expected to completely understand the vastly complex systems they take part in. Even while performing seemingly simple tasks, sometimes baffling things happen that make you question your assumptions about the universe. Sometimes these lead you to an a-ha moment and you feel a brief moment of elation. Sometimes you just have to shrug and get back to work.

This kind of complexity is not unique to code, but in few other areas of life is it so common and confronting. What's important to remember is that for most people, this is not what they're used to. And it can be really, really scary.

Many students will be tempted to try learning everything before they jump in and write a single line, because what if they wrote the _wrong_ code? To them, it can feel like taking your first class in a foreign language and on the first day, sitting down to write a novel in that language. The teacher insists you'll learn as you go, but you're terrified. You might even question their sanity - at least their credentials.

And you know what? This attitude really does make sense. In traditional schooling, you're typically given the answers, then asked to repeat them. When you turn something in, anything that's "wrong" is recorded in an immutable log of your performance. And even when you learn to correct your mistakes, that log remains unaltered, subtracted to the final calculation of your worth, branding you.

So naturally, students will ask questions like, "So what will happen when I press this button?" And you'll have to insist, "Let's try it!" And they'll stare at you for a second with a grimace before hesitantly turning back to their computer to try, knowing a big scary error might fly back at them, and not quite trusting that seeing the error really is OK. Not quite understanding yet that _everyone_ sees errors, all the time. We make typos, we misunderstand, documentation is out of date. It's inevitable.

Unfortunately, the fear and anxiety that students sometimes feel is not benign. In the moment, these emotions raise an "affective filter" that makes it extremely difficult for people to take in new information, retrieve old information, or process information currently in working memory. Learning in this state can be nearly impossible.

So if they keep trying without dealing with those underlying and rising emotions, they'll probably fail. Over and over again. And it can be easy for students to just throw up their hands and say, "I give up! I just don't have the mind for programming!" In a way, branding _yourself_ as incapable is actually comforting. You regain some control. You can say, "I'm still smart - just not _code_ smart." And when failure is so public and painful, it means you can stop trying.

So it's your job, _at all times_ and before anything else, to be patient and compassionate. Encourage students. Get excited with them. When something goes wrong, acknowledge that yes, it can be frustrating. Yes, many of these tools are poorly designed. When you `git add` without the `-A`, git only tracks additions and modifications, not deletions. When would we not want to track deletions? So far in my career, _never_. It's dumb. But these tools are like a puppy that pees on your rug. They can be fantastic companions and bring you lots of joy, especially the more you train each other, but once in a while, the dog will still nock something over or chew on a remote. And there's no point in getting mad. Help students understand this about code.

And whatever you do, __don't get frustrated__. Don't let their emotions drive your own. A negative interaction can be far more lasting than a positive one. If you find yourself getting upset, impatient, or just tired, excuse yourself for a while. Muster the best smile you can, turn to the student you're working with, and say you need to take care of something. Then defer them to another mentor. If there's anything I can do to help, let me know.

## People have to write bad code that works before writing good code that's maintainable and scalable

I don't know _anyone_ who learned about testing and then started writing full test suites for all their projects. The fact is, writing tests is annoying. Sometimes they break, even though your app actually works. And it slows you down _so much_, often making you less productive initially.

People only start writing tests after the repeated experience of pushing out some code and laying awake at night, wondering, "Does it still work? Or did I somehow break a seemingly unrelated part of my app... again?" And that anxiety - it's _even worse_ than writing tests. It can make you hate working on a project. At that point, you choose the lesser of two evils just to help you sleep at night.

Similarly, ask people who love programming about their _first_ program. Inevitably, it was crap. But it _actually did something_. It worked - at least sort of. And that rush pushed them to build their next program. And as they ran into problems, they did a little research, learned a little more, and over time, wrote better and better code. Not because writing better code is easy, but because it reduces complexity, and therefore anxiety. And allows them to solve bigger problems.

In school though, many teachers actively avoid this kind of learning. They want students to learn all the syntax, best practices, theories, histories, and _only after that_ start writing code. The idea is that once students have this solid foundation, they will never write bad code and develop bad practices. The idea is wrong.

Students who learn this way are given information completely outside the context of anything they care about. They memorize some words that don't really mean anything to them, and by the time they could actually use these ideas, they've forgotten almost everything and have to relearn it.

Big O notation, for example, is really boring to most people, unless they've actually written slow code. And not only slow code, but slow code they _cared_ about. Code that had a part of them in it. But no matter how much they cared, they had no idea how to figure out _why_ it was slow. When that person learns about Big O, they feel elated. Like they just gained a new super power.

So help people build real things - and things they care about. Things that reflect their personality, or are silly, or are part of an inside joke. Help them build something they'll want to show someone they care about. When people start doing that, it's hard to stop them.

## Learning to learn is worth more than knowledge

Have you [seen this](https://xkcd.com/627/)? I love that flowchart! It's completely true. And if you learn how to do this, you can do _anything_. Don't know anything about cars? Who cares? You can fix your car. Don't know anything about dishwashers? It doesn't matter. You can fix your dishwasher. This skill has allowed me to learn to build electronics, gain fluency in human languages, musical instruments, programming tools and languages, education models. The sky isn't even the limit. For the game _Kerbal Space Program_, I was Googling freakin' rocket science.

And it's so easy. What could be easier than having a question and asking it? But... it's not _actually_ easy. If it were easy, everyone would do it. And they don't. So how come? There are a lot of possible reasons.

1. __Ignorance__. It's very possible that no one has ever walked through those steps breaking down a problem with a student. It's more common than you might think. Explicitly walking through how to Google things can be important. As you help people troubleshoot, think out loud. And involve them with annoying questions, like, "What question do you think we should ask?"

2. __Context__. Many people know how to Google in some contexts, but not others. They might not realize that for coding, resources like Stack Overflow questions and GitHub documentation and issues exist. It may not occur to them to copy and paste an error into the Internet to see what it thinks. Tell people about these resources, let them know that they're not alone - that errors actually happen all the time, but it's not a big deal. Because there's always a way to fix it. And usually, someone else has already figured it out and explained somewhere how it happened, how to fix it, and how to avoid it in the future.

3. __Education__. In this context, education is a bad word. Throughout school, many students get through by making this implicit deal with the system. They'll be quiet, at least try to follow all the instructions, and when something goes wrong, they'll politely ask for help. At that point, someone will fix it for them. And then they'll follow more instructions. And then they're done. And they have a 4.0. That's the deal. Even if they think the course structure is crap, the content is useless, they can do this and almost assuredly succeed. And in the whole process, they never once have to engage their brain. Unfortunately, in order to figure out what to Google, you have to think about _what you're trying to do_. And many students, believe it or not, are not used to this.

4. __Fear__. Computers are scary. Really scary. One day, years ago, I was working on the command line and I wanted to delete a folder. I typed in `rm -rf` and then in a brain hiccup that mixed with `git add -A .`, I finished the command with `rm -rf .` instead of the name of the folder I wanted to delete. That deleted my current folder and anything inside of it, basically irrecoverably. My current folder was `~`: my home folder. All of my personal files. I hadn't backed up in a week. I won't go into a rant about how this shouldn't even be possible without some kind of confirmation and probably even root privileges. The point is, even for someone who's built, diagnosed and repaired, and programmed computers and other electronics for years, something like this can happen. Joseph Campbell had it right when he said, "Computers are like Old Testament gods; lots of rules and no mercy." For someone who has an even more abridged and possibly mistake-ridden copy of the rules, technology can be so terrifying that you're afraid to do _anything_ without an authority first telling you it's OK.

So what can you do to help people overcome these barriers to Googling? My #1 strategy is to guide them with questions. When someone frustratedly, maybe even _accusingly_ calls you over and says, "I followed the instructions exactly and it didn't work!" - then start asking questions, like:

- "What did you expect to happen and what happened instead?"
- "Did you see anything that looked like an error message? A lot of the time, someone will have had the same problem you found, worked on it for a long time, and found out how to fix it. Those people will usually post those fixes online and you can find them by putting the error message into Google, sometimes with some context, like the program you were trying to work with and what command you were trying to run."
- When someone is afraid, respect their fears. Don't tell them not to be afraid. But if there's something they didn't realize, explain it to them.
- Tell, don't show. When possible and if anxiety levels are low enough, explain to students how something works before telling them what to do. And tell them what to do before showing them what to do. Make them do as much work as possible and only make their lives easier in response to stress.

## It's not personal.

Everyone comes into every class with their own baggage. If they become frustrated, angry - even downright indignant, remember: it's probably not about you. I've had students scream at me, break down in tears for no apparent reason, get into physical fights with other students, accuse me of lying to them or wanting to hurt them.

This work can be emotional. And like it or not, your role is not simply to impart knowledge, but inevitably also to be a leader in group therapy. And in therapy, sometimes things get worse before they get better. When people lash out, try to remember that they're probably not angry, frustrated, or upset with _you_. And when you have a hard day, talk to someone about it. You're always welcome to talk to me. Sometimes, when a voice inside is asking, "I'm not a bad person, right? Right?" you just need someone else to confirm, "No, you're not a bad person." There's nothing wrong with that.

Fortunately, there's a strategy I use with middle schoolers and above that immediately helps people redirect or resolve their emotions 90% of the time. And it's simple: show them you care. Even if a student is angry and rude with you, just start with something like, "Hey, you look like you're having a rough day. Is everything going alright?"

I got this advice from another teacher many years ago and I didn't buy it at first. I had this idea that some of these kids just liked to mess with me. One of the worst examples was a middle schooler who always seemed to be _looking_ for something he could do that he knew he wasn't supposed to do. So, I pulled him out of class one day and tried the line on him. He said nothing was wrong, but was clearly agitated. Not reallying feeling it, I told him I was worried about him and that I wanted to help. He finally confessed that his sister was recently hit by a stray bullet; she was in the hospital and he was worried about her. He almost started crying, but then pulled himself together by punching a desk that was in the hall. _I_ almost started crying. I didn't know what to say. I told him I was sorry. And when he was ready, we went back inside and learned about the solar system.

You'd be amazed at what many people are going through outside of class. But showing them that you care is just the first step. After that, you have to engage them in coming up with a plan for inside of your class. Sometimes you have to say, "I'm sorry about what's going on. But I'm worried about you. What do you want to achieve here? And how can we work together to get there?"

That student I mentioned earlier - as we worked together more, we did develop plans to help him succeed. One deal we came up with was that if he got too upset, he could just take a break, no asking for permission. He could just put his head on his desk and breath for a while, ignoring everyone around him. It didn't fix what he had going on at home, but he was able to get through the day.

Most of the time, you can't save students. You have relatively little contact with them and ultimately no power over their actions and the actions of others in their lives. All you can do is try to make things a little easier. I want to stress though, that if students are dealing with something serious, it is not your job to get more involved. All you can do is sympathize and encourage them to seek qualified help, or at the very least, support from friends and family.
